Name: Alert ID: TMML2024033937747
WASHINGTON – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury designated two individuals based in Indonesia for their links to the terrorist groups Jemaah Islamiya (JI) and Jemmah Anshorut Tauhid (JAT). Said Ahmad Sungkar has been involved in fundraising efforts for JAT and supporting JI operatives. Afif Abdul Majid is a senior JAT leader who has overseen the recruitment and training of terrorists in Indonesia. These designations are part of the Treasury Department’s ongoing efforts to target these organizations as well as disrupt their financial and logistical support networks.

“The threats posed by terrorist groups such as Jemaah Islamiya and Jemmah Anshorut Tauhid remain significant. We will continue to take action to protect the international financial system from illicit activity tied to these groups, making it ever more difficult for them to carry out their acts of violence,” said Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.

The individuals sanctioned today were designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, which targets terrorists and their supporters. U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in any transactions with the individuals designated today, and any assets of those designees subject to U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.

JI is a Southeast Asia-based terrorist network with links to al-Qaida. It has been designated by the UN and the United States since 2002 and is responsible for numerous acts of terrorism including the Bali bombing in 2002, in which over 200 people from 27 nations were killed.

JAT is also an Indonesia-based terrorist group with links to JI. In February 2012 the State Department designated JAT pursuant to Executive Order 13224 and added the group to its list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations, while the Department of the Treasury designated three JAT leaders: JAT’s acting Emir Mochammad Achwan, JAT spokesperson Son Hadi bin Muhadjir, and JAT leadership figure Abdul Rosyid Ridho Ba'asyir, who was involved in recruiting and fundraising activities.

JAT seeks to establish an Islamic caliphate in Indonesia, and has carried out numerous attacks on Indonesian Government personnel and civilians in order to achieve this goal. Abu Bakar Ba’asyir, the founder and leader of JAT, and a UN 1267 listed individual, was convicted and sentenced to prison in 2011 for his role in organizing a terrorist training camp in Aceh.

Said Ahmad Sungkar

Said Ahmad Sungkar (Sungkar) is being designated for providing financial, material, or technological support, or financial or other services, to JI and JAT. Sungkar has been involved in supporting Indonesia-based JI and JAT terrorist networks over a number of years. Most recently, Sungkar conducted fundraising and recruiting for JAT in 2013.

Sungkar previously had served as JI’s media chief. Also, on several occasions, Sungkar has extended logistics support to JI operatives seeking to evade capture and provided extremist operatives with fake documents.

In addition to providing support and services to JI and JAT Sungkar was linked to a terrorist training camp in 2010 in Aceh, Indonesia, that was under the leadership of senior JI operative Joko Pitono (a.k.a. Dulmatin) and gathered militants from various regional groups, including some with links to al-Qa’ida. The militants, using the name “al-Qa'ida in Aceh,” plotted to kill U.S. aid workers and Western tourists and attack churches and Western NGOs. Dulmatin was killed in an Indonesian police raid in March 2010.

Afif Abdul Majid

Afif Abdul Majid (Abdul Majid) is being designated for acting for or on behalf of JAT. Abdul Majid since 2008 has served as a JAT leader, overseeing JAT fighters. In 2012, Abdul Majid played a role in coordinating the activities of regional JAT leaders. Abdul Majid was a member of JAT’s governing council, also called the “Majelis Syuro,” from 2008 to 2013.

Abdul Majid also served as the head of JAT’s Central Java branch, as of late 2011. Abdul Majid in August 2010 conducted a swearing in ceremony for hundreds of JAT fighters, some of whom were expected to take violent action against the Indonesian police. In past years, Abdul Majid headed JAT recruitment efforts for a paramilitary wing that provided training for fighters, weapons experts, and hackers.

Abdul Majid has supported training activities for terrorist networks outside JAT, as well. As of early 2010, Abdul Majid donated approximately $2,000 to support the Aceh terrorist training camp, including weapons and ammunition purchases.

Identifying information:

Name: Said Ahmad Sungkar

AKA: Sahid Ahmad Sungkar

AKA: Said Sungkar

Nationality: Indonesian

DOB: 25 October 1961

Passport No.: U337061, Indonesian,

Passport Issued 17 December 2009, Expiration Date 17 December 2014

National Identity Card (NIC) No.: 337502.251061.0002, Indonesian

Name: Afif Abdul Majid

AKA: Afif bin Abdul Madjid

AKA: Afif Abdul Al Majid

AKA: Afif Abdul Madjid

Nationality: Indonesian

DOB: 1 January 1955

POB: Pacitan, East Java, Indonesia

###

​
