Name: Alert ID: TMML2024036468522
Former workers for the Las Vegas billionaire and casino-owner have been revealing what it was like to work for Steve Wynn.

Many have recalled how the man had a fiery temper during meetings with staff and how he would cast an intimidating figure often shouting and banging his fists on the table to get his point across.

When faced with threats from staff he would simply laugh in their faces by declaring himself to be 'the most powerful man in Nevada.'

It was not a declaration that anyone in the room would dare question.

The billionaire casino mogul resigned last Tuesday less than two weeks after the Wall Street Journal reported that a number of women said Wynn harassed or assaulted them and that one case led to a $7.5 million settlement, although he denies the allegations.

Wynn never cared about making friends with his workers and according to tales over the years wouldn't think twice about screwing them over when it came to their wages in order to keep more money in the company.

During one meeting with 15 card dealers at the Wynn Las Vegas, staff were unhappy about a new policy that demanded they share their tips with their supervisors who already earned $100,000-a-year.

For many, it would mean making around $15-$20,000 less in take home pay. Dealers said the change would cost them as much as 20% of their pay.

When the workers said they would file a complaint against him with the National Labor Relations Board, Wynn theatened to fire them if they unionized.

He shouted and belittled them while slamming his fists onto the table reminding them that he was 'the most powerful man in Nevada.'

The dealers argued that if Wynn wanted to give supervisors a raise, he should reach into his own pocket.

When Wynn walked into the room during the 2006 meeting Wynn acknowledged his workers upset at the new shared tipping policy but told them there was nothing they could do to change it.

He advised them against starting a union and referred to other Vegas businesses where employees voted to unionize or had gone on strike and then subsequently lost their jobs.

'If you join a union, I can by law replace all 600 of you,' dealer Tynisia Boone recalled Wynn saying. 'If you picket you will automatically be terminated because those are my sidewalks.'

Even with Wynn now having left the company he founded, many employees remain uncomfortable about speaking out about the man such is his power and influence across Sin City.

According to CNN, one lawyer described Wynn as a man who was not afraid to 'get rid of a fly by firing a shotgun.'

Single-mother Cynthia Fields who was in the 2006 card dealers meeting and sitting right next to Wynn explained to him that she had specifically chosen to work at his casino because it paid better than others in the city.

'If I had known I was going to come here and I was going to have money taken away for nothing I had done,' Fields told Wynn, 'I possibly would not have made that change.'

She said the new policy would result in around $20,000 less pay a year which would be 'burden' for her.

Wynn is alleged to have replied, 'If $15,000 to $20,000 a year makes that big of a difference in your life, then you're doing something wrong.'

Wynn then became irate. Fields said: 'he was leaning over me' so intently that 'I could feel the spit on my face from his mouth.'

Another dealer, Tynisia Boone confirmed what Fields had seen.

'Wynn got up and started screaming and then started getting up and down and slamming his hand and fist on the table saying he was "'the most powerful man in Nevada.''' According to Boone.

When a third dealer, Tom Golly then declared Wynn's attempt to take tips as being 'illegal,' he simply said that 'his name was on the building and he can do anything he wants to do.'

In testimony before a Labor Relations Board judge, Wynn didn't remember anything of how he had behaved although he did admit to banging his fist on the table and putting it down to the empathy he felt for his workers.

Elsewhere on the gaming floor, eleven cocktail waitresses who worked for Wynn at The Mirage sued him in 1997 claiming they were discriminated against because of their weight and age.

Six years later, The Mirage settled the waitresses' claims, but the abuse of female staff appears frequently in recent allegations against Wynn.

Charlotte Arrowsmith who lead the complaint on behalf of the cocktail waitresses said she would often be mocked and was called the 'blue whale'.

In an interview with CNN she wept with joy at the news that Wynn resigned. 'Oh, hallelujah, thank you Lord! Something positive can come from this,' she said. 'After all that he put us through, he needs to be humiliated.'

The Wall Street Journal spoke with 150 people who currently work for Wynn or have in the past, and a number of the women who no longer work at one of the billionaire businessman's properties were incredibly forthcoming in describing the lengths they would allegedly go to in order to avoid being alone with their boss.

Some scheduled fake appointments to make sure they would not be chosen to give Wynn spa treatments, while others went so far as to hide in bathrooms when he came into the salon.

One worker said that she was coerced into performing a sex act on Wynn, with her hand at the end of his massages, adding that Wynn asked at one point if she could use her mouth rather than rubbing his penis to climax when they were done with the session.

That woman refused, but in 2005 another employee was not able to decline Wynn's advances when he ordered her to disrobe and lie on a table so they could have sex.

She reported Wynn and received a $7.5 million settlement, which was revealed by Wynn's ex-wife Elaine in court papers.

It was that court filing which led to the Journal's investigation.

At the end of every session, the woman said that Wynn paid her $1,000 in cash

'I did it willingly, because I felt I had to,' she told the paper. 'I didn't really want to. I was afraid for my job.'

Wynn gave a statement to the Journal after their investigation: 'The idea that I ever assaulted any woman is preposterous. We find ourselves in a world where people can make allegations, regardless of the truth, and a person is left with the choice of weathering the insulting publicity or engaging in multiyear lawsuits. It is deplorable for anyone to find themselves in this situation.'

There are countless other stories concerning Wynn howeverWynn Resorts spokesman Michael Weaver has declined to comment on the allegations made by any of the Wynn employees .

In a tale from 2005 that has been seen by CNN details how a woman who worked as a cleaning crew manager for Wynn walked into a Las Vegas police station after she claims Wynn assaulted her.

Raquel Houston was summoned by Wynn to the Lure Nightclub, a lounge at one of the Wynn Resorts, 'at the speed of light.'

After being ordered to the venue, crews were working buffer machines to clean marble at the club.

'He turns around to me and then he starts yelling at me and grabbing me tight and pulling on me,' Houston told CNN. 'I was shocked. I couldn't believe that he was doing this.'

'He was going, "What is this crap? What is going on here? Who gave you authorization?'"

'I was trying to answer his question,' Houston said. 'I told him, "This is the marble crew that does your floors every night."' I told him, '"Please stop grabbing me. Stop, let me go."'

Houston sued Wynn in civil court describing how he would 'pull her', 'tightened his grip on her arm' and 'continued to drag her,' the suit said.

Her arm was injured in the incident, she alleged, and she had to get medical treatment, including therapy.

She sued Wynn for $10,000 each for medical costs, lost wages, emotional distress and other compensation.

Wynn denied the allegations and hired lawyers in New York and Vegas for $140,000.

After a four year legal battle, the arbitrator ruled in favor of Wynn, saying Houston failed to provide evidence and meet the burden of proof.

Houston ended up having to file for bankruptcy after Wynn demanded to be reimbursed $49,000 in costs.

After the case, she lost her job and is now finding it impossible to get a job elsewhere at other Vegas casinos all because she challenged Wynn.

'It wasn't about money,' her lawyer told CNN. 'To my feeling, it was just vindictive.

'I think he wanted to send a message to anybody that might want to challenge Wynn Resorts or Steve Wynn: It won't end well for you.'
