Name: Alert ID: TMML2024034163743
In accordance with paragraph 13 of resolution 1822 (2008) and subsequent related resolutions, the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee makes accessible a narrative summary of reasons for the listing for individuals, groups, undertakings and entities included in the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions List.

Date on which the narrative summary became available on the Committee's website:

Additional information:

Mohamad Iqbal Abdurrahman, also known as Abu Jibril, has been a close associate of Nurjaman Riduan Isamuddin, a.k.a. Hambali (QDi.087). He was Jemaah Islamiyah (JI)'s (QDe.092) primary recruiter and second in command - running JI operations and heading its regional “shura” before his arrest by Malaysian authorities in June 2001. He was also reportedly a financial conduit for Al-Qaida (QDe.004) in the region.

Abdurrahman has been part of the leadership of Kumpulan Mujahideen Malaysia (KMM, Malaysian Mujahideen Organization), which has close ties to JI and was established in 1995 at a meeting of Afghanistan veterans. KMM leadership has included Abu Bakar Ba’asyir (QDi.217) and Nurjaman Riduan Isamuddin.

Abdurrahman was elected deputy leader of the Indonesian Mujahidin Council (MMI) in 2008. MMI was founded, inter alia, by Ba’asyir and chaired by Ifran Suryahadi Awas who was the younger brother of Mohamad Iqbal Abdurrahman. MMI was associated with the JI organization in Indonesia, which came to be known as Mantiqi II and was headed by Abdullah Anshori (QDi.216). Anshori and Ba’asyir used MMI as a financial conduit to support JI’s goals and to bring together the various like-minded groups within South-East Asia. MMI’s board members included Agus Dwikarna (QDi.111) and other JI members. Abdurrahman also controls Ar-Rahmah Media, a pro-JI video production company.

Abdurrahman and Agus Dwikarna were also part of the leadership of the Laskar Mujahideen and the Laskar Jundullah, two paramilitary organizations established by JI to engage in sectarian conflict in 1999-2001. The former was closely linked to JI and Al-Qaida.

Abdurrahman was deported from Malaysia in May 2004 and taken into custody in Indonesia where he served a five and a half-month sentence for immigration offenses and forgery.
