Name: Alert ID: TMML2024037742147
The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated drug launderer Pedro Claver Mejia Salazar (Mejia Salazar) and his narcotics money laundering network based in Medellín, Colombia pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act). Treasury also designated Colombian national Fredy Alonso Mira Perez (alias Fredy Colas), an important underboss in the criminal organization known as La Oficina de Envigado, as well as 10 additional individuals, and 14 entities, all based in Colombia. As a result of today’s actions, all assets that are based in the United States or in control by U.S. persons in which the individuals and entities designated today have an interest in are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

Mejia Salazar, often acting under the authority and direction of Fredy Colas, primarily launders narcotics proceeds on behalf of La Oficina de Envigado, a group which Treasury designated pursuant to the Kingpin Act on June 26, 2014. As part of his global drug money laundering operations, Mejia Salazar and his network work closely with Lebanese-Colombian drug money launderer Ayman Saied Joumaa, also a Specially Designated Narcotics Trafficker.

“Operatives of La Oficina de Envigado have tapped into Ayman Joumaa’s international networks and successfully moved drug proceeds back to traffickers in Colombia from locations around the world, posing a major threat to U.S. interests,” said Director of Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control Director Adam Szubin. “Treasury will continue to aggressively expose and disrupt the activities of these illicit networks, wherever they may be operating.”

Mejia Salazar relies on a network of trusted family members to carry out his money laundering transactions, including his sons – Juan Carlos, Victor Gabriel, Andres Camilo, and Jose Alejandro Mejia Alzate – and his nephews – Jesus Rodolfo, Jose Albeiro, and Jose Guillermo Barco Mejia. Several entities designated today, which are owned by Mejia Salazar and his family, are also directly involved in these illicit transactions, including Grupo Empresarial Enkor Profesional S.A.S., a well-known beauty products company based in Medellín.

US Treasury press release: click here
