Name: Alert ID: TMML2024035723218
Eta claim independence for seven regions in Spain and France

Three suspected Eta bomb plotters arrested in Britain last year have been extradited to Spain, police have said.

The three suspects include men aged 24 and 29 and a woman aged 36. They were arrested in April in Sheffield.

They are accused by the Spanish authorities of involvement in a 2006 bomb attack on a naval office building.

The names of the three extradited suspects are: Inigo Albisu Hernandez, 24, Zigor Ruiz Jaso, 29, and Ana Isabel Lopez Monge, 36.

Their extradition was ordered on 17 August last year. Their removal from the country follows all of their appeals having been exhausted.

Bloody campaign

The three were extradited on a flight that left at 1200 GMT.

Lawyers for the group had appealed against their extradition on the basis that the arrest warrants they had been detained under were defective.

The lawyers had argued that returning them to Spain would expose them to inhumane and degrading treatment.

At the time their extradition orders were made, City of Westminster Magistrates' Court heard the three suspects had come together as a "reserve cell" after a former "command" had been stood down.

Franco dictatorship

Melanie Cumberland, representing the Spanish judicial authority, said Ruiz was alleged to have carried out the February 2006 attack, for which Eta claimed responsibility, in Motrico, Spain.

No-one was hurt in the attack, although there was damage done to property.

For more than three decades, Eta waged a bloody campaign for independence for the seven regions in northern Spain and south-west France that Basque separatists claim as their own.

Euskadi Ta Azkatasuna, or Eta, whose name stands for Basque Homeland and Freedom, first emerged in the 1960s as a student resistance movement bitterly opposed to General Franco's repressive military dictatorship.

Following the Spanish Civil War, the Basque language was banned - although it was being taught in private schools by the 1950s - the Basque's distinctive culture suppressed and intellectuals imprisoned and tortured for their political and cultural beliefs.
