Name: Alert ID: TMML2024034075244
Nine bodies were discovered dumped in a bloody pile outside a home Thursday in Nuevo Laredo, just across the Texas border, Mexican officials said.

Five women and four men were found with a handwritten sign left on top of their bodies, not far from an international bridge that connects to the U.S., a Tamaulipas state official told The Associated Press. The official spoke on condition of anonymity.

The banner read, "This is not a joke, nephew," according to photos from local media.

Such messages are often left by drug cartels as warnings to rivals.

Nuevo Laredo has long been dominated by the Zetas cartel, which has splintered into factions after the arrest or killing of top leaders.

The bodies were on a sidewalk near a sports complex at the intersection of Abraham Lincoln and Porfirio Diaz streets, The Laredo Morning Times reports.

"I just passed by that street and the people who live there were washing those sidewalks, the hideous blood odor," someone reportedly commented on a Facebook photo of the bodies.

The state prosecutor's office said it is investigating the killings.

Last week, Ivàn "El Taliban" Velázquez Caballero, who rose through the ranks of the Zetas, received a 30-year prison sentence for drug-trafficking and money-laundering charges he pleaded guilty to in 2014, the Laredo Morning Times reported.

The day before the discovery of the bodies, an old faction of the Zetas, La Vieja Guardia, threatened the younger generation of Zetas, the Cartel del Noreste, in a message that's circulating on social media, the paper reports.

"People of Nuevo Laredo, tell your children to stop frequenting the night clubs," the message states. "All of the sudden, we will throw out grenades and burn down the clubs and everything that finances the Norestitas [CDN members]."

It was signed by Z-47 and Z-33.

Eduardo Mendoza Robles has been identified as Z-33 by the U.S. government, which says he's a fugitive wanted for trafficking drugs and weapons.

It's not known if the message is related to the incident Thursday.
