Name: Alert ID: TMML2024039457343
A Brisbane accountant has been charged with multiple money laundering offences over her alleged involvement in a “relentless” email scam worth more than $3 million.

The 65-year-old Carina woman has been accused of being a “money mule” for hackers who had fraudulently gained access to the email accounts of businesses.

Police have alleged hackers sent fake or falsified invoices to businesses who then sent cash to the woman.

It’s alleged the woman’s job was to funnel the money that was paid to her by the businesses and send it overseas.

A joint investigation between Queensland police and the Australian Federal Police uncovered at least seven victims had unwittingly transferred $3.3 million to more than 50 accounts linked to the woman over the last 12 months.

Detective Inspector Vince Byrnes said the woman’s alleged role was “vital” to helping the hackers.

“The alleged offending in this case is very concerning, it’s relentless in nature and has a very poor effect on our community and our economy,” he said.

“Anybody who is thinking of putting money through their account on behalf of somebody they don’t know — I would warn them not to do so.”

Email compromise team investigator Detective Senior Constable Adrian Holt said one victim alone had been scammed more than $1 million.

“They range from large-scale business that pay bills to that value right down to small business, aged care, self-funded superannuation funds,” he said.

The woman was arrested yesterday after her home was raided by the state’s Financial and Cyber Crime Group.

Detectives seized computers and phones and she was charged with several offences involving dealing in the proceeds of crime.

She is expected to appear in the Brisbane Magistrates Court on October 16.

Detective Inspector Byrnes said it was important for the community to be aware of scams and for people to safeguard their email accounts.

“Businesses of any size can be targeted so it’s important to regularly review processes,” he said.

“To reduce victimisation in our community, examine those invoices, check the bank account details … verify independently with that vendor.

“It’s important we protect our community by being vigilant ourselves.”
