Name: Alert ID: TMML2024035432346
image copyrightPress trust of india

A panel investigating spot-fixing in the Indian Premier League has found a top cricket team official guilty of illegal betting, media reports say.

The panel's report said Gurunath Meiyappan of Chennai Super Kings passed on information to illegal bookmakers.

Spot-fixing involves players bowling wides and no-balls at certain times arranged beforehand with bookmakers.

Mr Meiyappan has not yet commented on the report's findings, but he denied the allegations last year.

The three-member panel, headed by Justice Mukul Mudgal, was formed by the Supreme Court to investigate spot-fixing and illegal betting in the Indian Premier League last year. It submitted its 170-page report to the court on Monday.

"Roots of corruption and malpractices have crept in deep into the game of cricket, more particularly the IPL, and are seeping into the game at an alarming rate," said the report, which was seen by the AFP news agency.

It said the allegations against Mr Meiyappan - son-in-law of N Srinivasan, head of the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) - needed further investigation.

Mr Srinivasan, who is also the owner of the Chennai Super Kings team, "stepped aside" from his post as BCCI president in June last year after Mr Meiyappan was arrested over allegations of betting in the IPL.

Mr Meiyappan has since been released on bail, and Mr Srinivasan has returned as the head of the cricket board. Mr Srinivasan was elected head of cricket's world body, the International Cricket Council (ICC), on Saturday.

Last July Indian cricketer and Rajasthan Royals fast bowler S Sreesanth was charged along with 38 other people over the IPL spot-fixing scandal.

In September, India's cricket board handed a life ban to Sreesanth and his Royals teammate Ankeet Chavan.

The IPL is considered to be the world's showcase for Twenty20 cricket.

Top Indian and international players take part, contributing to what is the world's richest cricket tournament.

Features

'We are first-hand witnesses of this devastation'

The women changing the face of US politics

'He held me under hot water during lockdown.' Video'He held me under hot water during lockdown.'

Government reports 20,412 coronavirus cases on Tuesday

Covid vaccine: How will we keep it cold enough?

The Trump campaign 'Four Seasons' saga explained. VideoThe Trump campaign 'Four Seasons' saga explained

Where will mass testing be available?

Forget Indyref2, what about Indyref3?

Xbox Series X: 'We'll meet gamers wherever they are'

Most Read

Toronto van attack: 'Incel' killer Minassian pleads not criminally responsible1

US election: Justice lawyer quits after attorney general orders 'vote fraud' inquiries2

Apple unveils first Mac computers powered by its own M1 chip3

US-Mexico border: Bid to reunite migrant families 'finds 121 more separated children'4

Covid: Bolsonaro hails suspension of Chinese vaccine trial5

Australian PM under fire for interrupting female minister6

Stacey Abrams: The woman behind Biden's biggest surprise7

Biden defends Obamacare as top court hears case8

US election: Technical error blamed for PM's Biden tweet glitch9

Facebook: Biden aide Bill Russo attacks post-election role10
