Name: Alert ID: TMML2024031399426
Action Targets Drug Trafficker Operating in the Port of Callao and his Network

Washington – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated Peruvian national Gino Dusan Padros Degregori as a Specially Designated Narcotics Trafficker (SDNT) pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act) for playing a significant role in international narcotics trafficking. OFAC also designated Peruvian national Guillermo Jean Pierre Zegarra Martinez, a key financial facilitator for Padros Degregori, for providing material assistance, support, or goods or services in support of the international narcotics trafficking activities of, and acting for or on behalf of, Padros Degregori. Three businesses in Lima, Peru, that are owned or controlled by Padros Degregori, were also designated. As a result of today's action, U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions or otherwise dealing with these individuals and entities, and any assets they may have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.

"Treasury, in coordination with our law enforcement partners, continues to target and disrupt the activities of those who play a significant role in narcotics trafficking throughout the world," said OFAC Director John E. Smith. "Today's action highlights the increasing reach of Peruvian drug trafficking organizations that move significant amounts of cocaine to Europe and North America."

Today's OFAC designation was taken in coordination with the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and Customs and Border Protection's National Targeting Center.

Padros Degregori has been involved in narcotics trafficking for more than a decade, exploiting Lima's Port of Callao to ship approximately 1,000-kilogram cocaine loads per month concealed in containerized cargo – including heavy machinery – to destinations in Western Europe, Mexico, and the United States. Padros Degregori has ties to Mexican drug trafficking organizations that maintain a strong presence in Peru, including the Sinaloa Cartel. He also launders millions in drug proceeds in U.S. dollars and euros back to Peru from both the United States and Europe. Zegarra Martinez travels to the United States and Europe where he supports the collection and laundering of narcotics proceeds destined for Peru on behalf of Padros Degregori.

The Peruvian businesses designated by OFAC are all owned, controlled, or directed by Padros Degregori. The Lima-based businesses include R Inver Corp S.A.C., a real estate and construction company; G & M Autos S.A.C., an automobile repair shop; and SBK Import S.A.C., an importer of automobiles, boats, and heavy machinery.

Since June 2000, more than 2,000 individuals and entities have been named pursuant to the Kingpin Act for their role in international narcotics trafficking. Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1,437,153 per violation to more severe criminal penalties. Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.

####
