Name: Alert ID: TMML2024033831249
​

WASHINGTON – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated German Muñoz Hoyos as a Specially Designated Narcotics Trafficker (SDNT) pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act) for playing a significant role in international narcotics trafficking. OFAC also designated five individuals for acting for or behalf of German Muñoz Hoyos and six entities that are owned, controlled, or directed by Muñoz and/or his associates. As a result of today’s action, all assets of those designated that are under the jurisdiction of the United States or in the control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

“Today’s designation aims to prevent the flow of millions of dollars’ worth of narcotics to various Mexican and European drug trafficking organizations,” said John E. Smith, OFAC Acting Director. “We are committed to identifying and aggressively targeting major narcotics traffickers using all tools necessary to protect the U.S. financial system from the malign influence of narcotics traffickers and the laundering of their illicit proceeds.”

German Muñoz Hoyos

German Muñoz Hoyos, a Colombian national who also holds Mexican citizenship, is the leader of an international drug trafficking organization that is responsible for the coordination and distribution of multi-ton quantities of narcotics from Central and South America to North America and Europe.

The business holdings of German Muñoz Hoyos designated today are Avical S.A., a poultry and egg production company headquartered in Manizales, Caldas, Colombia; the Colombian investment company Inversiones La Plata M & M, S. en C.A. (a.k.a. Inversiones La Plata M Y M); and four shell companies incorporated in Panama — Romik, S.A., Gemuho Holding, Inc., Unirefriclima, S.A., and Munsa International Investments, S.A. In addition, OFAC designated Carlos Ivan Munoz Hoyos, Jonathan Munoz Mejia, Jhonny German Munoz Mejia, Eliana Munoz Mejia, and Claudia Julieta Murillo Salazar, key family members who operate businesses on behalf of German Munoz Hoyos.

Today’s designation was conducted in close coordination with the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Customs and Border Protection National Targeting Center, and the Government of Colombia.

Since June 2000, more than 1,900 entities and individuals have been named pursuant to the Kingpin Act for their role in international narcotics trafficking. Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties. Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.
