Name: Alert ID: TMML2024039475156
Published

image copyrightReuters

Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos says he is "outraged" by allegations of a massive corruption network in the Colombian army.

The allegations were published by the Colombian weekly magazine Semana.

It says it has taped conversations that prove that huge amounts of money were siphoned off by corrupt army officers.

The defence budget has soared in recent years and the US continues to pay Colombia a generous annual allowance to wage war on drugs.

Some generals and other senior officers are accused of taking bribes of up to 50% of the contracts they awarded; others of diverting money that was meant to be spent at the barracks on petrol and other supplies.

The irregularities allegedly took place in 2012 and 2013.

'Full investigation'

President Santos has ordered the ministry of defence to carry out a full investigation.

"I feel outraged by the damage that this causes to the armed forces and the country," said Mr Santos.

He added that "crimes of corruption" should be investigated by civilian prosecutors - not military courts.

Two weeks ago, Semana published potentially damaging allegations involving the Colombian army.

It said that an elite military group had spied on government officials engaged in peace negotiations in Cuba with Colombia's largest rebel group, the Farc.

The army said the group had been set up legally and had not performed illicit activities.

Features

Immunising the world against Covid-19. VideoImmunising the world against Covid-19

The women changing the face of US politics

'He held me under hot water during lockdown.' Video'He held me under hot water during lockdown.'

Government reports 20,412 coronavirus cases on Tuesday

The Trump campaign 'Four Seasons' saga explained. VideoThe Trump campaign 'Four Seasons' saga explained

Where will mass testing be available?

Forget Indyref2, what about Indyref3?

Xbox Series X: 'We'll meet gamers wherever they are'

Most Read

Toronto van attack: 'Incel' killer Minassian pleads not criminally responsible1

US election: Justice lawyer quits after attorney general orders 'vote fraud' inquiries2

Covid: Bolsonaro hails suspension of Chinese vaccine trial3

Australian PM under fire for interrupting female minister4

Apple unveils first Mac computers powered by its own M1 chip5

US-Mexico border: Bid to reunite migrant families 'finds 121 more separated children'6

Stacey Abrams: The woman behind Biden's biggest surprise7

US election: Technical error blamed for PM's Biden tweet glitch8

Biden defends Obamacare as top court hears case9

Facebook: Biden aide Bill Russo attacks post-election role10
